Revisions to draft article on using GDAL and R from conda-forge (#983)
firelab/gdalraster: vignettes/articles/r-and-gdal-in-conda.Rmd

)
```

DRAFT: last updated 2026-05-25

> Conda is an open-source, cross-platform, language-agnostic package manager and environment management system. It was originally developed to solve package management challenges faced by Python data scientists [[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conda_(package_manager))]. Today, conda is a general purpose packaging format that covers a wide selection of programming languages, including C, C++, Fortran, Rust, Go, Python, and R.

Reviewer: I would just drop all mention of Python specifically here as I think this just makes it seems like Python is special in a way that it isn't.

```suggestion
Conda is an open-source, cross-platform, language-agnostic package manager and environment management system. The conda package format is general purpose and covers a wide selection of programming languages, including C, C++, Fortran, Rust, Go, Python, and R.
```

> Conda uses the concept of channels as the base for hosting and managing packages. Conda is often associated with the commercial company Anaconda which provides the [Anaconda.org](https://anaconda.org/) channel of packages. Alternatively, the conda-forge project builds and distributes packages via [conda-forge.org](https://conda-forge.org/), specializing in hard-to-build or unique packages that often arise in a scientific computing context. Conda-forge is community-driven and community-curated. Both conda and conda-forge are [NumFocus-affiliated](https://numfocus.org/project/conda-forge) projects.

Reviewer: I would be careful in the comparison here as the Anaconda channels should really only be used by individuals or companies that have service-level contracts with Anaconda. Describing it otherwise invites accidental license breaches. Conda-forge is also not meant to be exclusive in any way and while the scientific open source community uses it heavily and contributes it isn't scoped specially towards scientific purposes. 

```suggestion
Conda uses the concept of channels as the base for hosting and managing packages. Conda is often associated with the commercial company Anaconda which provides the [Anaconda.org](https://anaconda.org/) channel of packages. Alternatively, the conda-forge project builds and distributes packages via [conda-forge.org](https://conda-forge.org/). Conda-forge is community-driven and community-curated. Both conda and conda-forge are [NumFocus-affiliated](https://numfocus.org/project/conda-forge) projects.
```

Conda offers features potentially of interest to R users who work with geospatial data:

* install different versions of binary packages with their required dependencies on multiple platforms
* assemble sets of packages in isolation using environments
* manage and switch between environments that use various packages for different projects
* access R and a large number of CRAN packages, along with current GDAL and its dependencies
* benefit from lightweight [modular GDAL packaging](https://quansight.com/post/introducing-lightweight-versions-of-gdal-and-pdal/) based on deferred plugin loading
* available plugins include format drivers that sometimes are unavailable in other package managers, such as the Arrow and Parquet vector drivers

Conda-forge provides pre-compiled binary packages for **gdalraster** that track CRAN releases, for the following platforms:

[![Conda Platforms](https://img.shields.io/conda/pn/conda-forge/r-gdalraster.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/r-gdalraster)

> Several tools are available for managing packages in the [conda ecosystem](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/conda_ecosystem/). The next few sections describe `conda`, the original package manager written in Python. [Pixi](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/) might also be considered as a fast, modern, and reproducible package management tool. The section "Pixi for conda package management" further below describes a Pixi-equivalent setup.

Reviewer: Conda is no longer written primarily in Python.

```suggestion
Several tools are available for managing packages in the [conda ecosystem](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/conda_ecosystem/). The next few sections describe `conda`. [Pixi](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/) might also be considered as a fast, modern, and reproducible package management tool. The section "Pixi for conda package management" further below describes a Pixi-equivalent setup.
```

* `libgdal-tiledb`: `raster.tiledb` driver as a plugin
* `libgdal-xls`: `vector.xls` driver as a plugin

The package `libgdal-core` is a dependency of `r-gdalraster` so it is installed automatically, but the additional driver plugins are optional. We'll install additional drivers before starting an R session in order to work with Parquet vector files. The following command installs `libgdal-arrow-parquet` in the active environment (assuming conda-forge is the default channel):

```bash
conda install libgdal-arrow-parquet
```

## Pixi for conda package management

Pixi is an alternative to using `conda` as described above. It is a modern, Rust-based package manager with lockfiles, tasks, and multi-environment support. Pixi introduces a workspace-centric approach rather than focusing solely on environments.

> Installation instructions can be found in the Pixi [Getting Started](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/installation/) guide. Once installed you can create an environment in a pixi workspace, basically equivalent to the setup described above for conda:

Reviewer: This is a silly nitpick, but I've learned from the Pixi team that this is their preferred style guide.

```suggestion
Installation instructions can be found in the Pixi [Getting Started](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/installation/) guide. Once installed you can create an environment in a Pixi workspace, basically equivalent to the setup described above for conda:
```

```bash
pixi init r_example
cd r_example
pixi add r-essentials r-gdalraster libgdal-arrow-parquet

> pixel shell

Reviewer: Could also talk about `pixi run` in this section, though maybe that's not something that the GDAL community is super familiar with. It can be useful though if you want to build up tasks or have things run in automation / CI.

```suggestion
pixi shell
```

```

> The last command starts an interactive shell within the environment (use `exit` to leave the shell). You get a digest-level lock file automatically, so the environment is fully reproducible.

Reviewer: Here I'm using language that explicitly brings up version control, but maybe you might not want that and in that situation you might want to just mention it being present.

```suggestion
The last command starts an interactive subshell with the environment activated (use `exit` to leave the shell). You get a digest-level `pixi.lock` lock file automatically, so the environment is fully reproducible as long as the lock file is commited with the rest of the project.
```

> Pixi also supports using tools and libraries globally, similar to conda's base environment without having to use an activate command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pixi also supports using tools and libraries [globally](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/global_tools/introduction/), similar to conda's base environment without having to use an activate command:
```

```bash
pixi global install gdal libgdal-core

> pixi global install libgdal-arrow-parquet  # if needed

Reviewer: As I don't know these tools, is the goal to have them exist in standalone environments or all together? If together, they you need to create one global `gdal` environment with the others added as dependencies like

```
pixi global install gdal --with libgdal-core
pixi global install --environment gdal libgdal-arrow-parquet  # if needed
```

If so, then https://gdal.org/en/stable/download.html#cross-platform-package-managers should get updated too.

Also, depending on what CLI tools you need globally exposed you might also have to provide information on that.

If these were all designed to be in standalone environments then that's fine.

Author: I think the latter. `gdal` is the conda-forge package that provides GDAL Python bindings and Python utilities.
